How do you evaluate
your model performance?
In this lecture, we will look at
different metrics that can be used to
evaluate the performance of
your classification model.
After this video, you will be able to
discuss how performance metrics
can be used to evaluate models.
Name three model evaluation metrics, and
explain why accuracy may be misleading.
For the classification task, an error
occurs when the model's prediction of
the class label is different
from the true class label.
We can also define the different types
of errors in classification depending on
the predicted and true labels.
Let's take the case with the task is
to predict whether a given animal is
a mammal or not.
This is a binary classification task
with the class label being either yes,
indicating mammal, or
no indicating non-mammal.
Then the different types
of errors are as follows.
If the true label is yes and
the predicted label is yes,
then this is a true positive,
abbreviated as TP.
This is the case where the label is
correctly predicted as positive.
If the true label is no and
the predicted label is no,
then this is a true negative,
abbreviated as TN.
This is the case where the label is
correctly predicted as negative.
If the true label is no and
the predicted label is yes,
then this is a false positive,
abbreviated as FP.
This is the case with the label is
incorrectly predicted as positive,
when it should be negative.
If the true label is yes and
the predicted label is no, then this
is a false negative abbreviated as FN.
This is the case where the label is
incorrectly predicted as negative,
when it should be positive.
These definitions can take a while to sink
in, so feel free to hit the pause button
and replay button several times
here to review this part.
These four different types of errors
are used in calculating many evaluation
metrics for classifiers.
The most commonly used evaluation
metric is the accuracy rate, or
accuracy for short.
For classication,
accuracy is calculated as the number of
correct predictions divided by
the total number of predictions.
Note that the number of correct
predictions is the sum of the true
positives, and the true negatives, since
the true and predicted labels match for
those cases.
The accuracy rate is an intuitive
way to measure the performance
of a classification model.
Model performance can also be
expressed in terms of error rate.
Error rate is the opposite
of accuracy rate.
Let's look at an example to see how
accuracy and error rates are calculated.
The table on the left, lists the true
label along with the model's prediction
for a data set of ten samples.
First, let’s figure out
the number of true positives.
Recall that a true positive occurs when
the output is correctly predicted as
positive.
In other words the true label is yes,
and the model's prediction is yes.
In this example there are three true
positives as indicated by the red arrows.
So, TP=3, remember that value
as we'll need it later.
Now, let's figure out
the number of true negatives.
A true negative occurs when the output
is correctly predicted as negative.
In other words, the true label is no and
the model's prediction is no.
In this example there are four true
negatives as indicated by the green
arrows.
So TN = 4,
we'll need to remember this value as well.
Now we use the values for TP and
TN to calculate the accuracy rate.
Using the equation for accuracy rate,
we plug in three for TP and four for TN.
We get seven correct predictions for
the numerator.
The denominator is simply the total number
of samples in our data set, which is ten.
So the accuracy rate for
example is 7 out of 10 which is 0.7 or
70%.
The error rate is the exact
opposite of the accuracy rate.
To calculate the error rate, we simply
subtract the accuracy rate from 1.
For our example that is
1- 0.7 which is 0.3.
So the error rate for
this example is 0.3 or 30%.
There's a limitation with accuracy and
error rates when you have
a class imbalance problem.
This is when there are very few
samples of the class of interest, and
the majority are negative examples.
An example of this is identifying
if a tumor is cancerous or not.
What is of interest is identifying
samples with cancerous tumors, but
these positive cases where the tumor
is cancerous are very rare.
So, you end up with a very small
fraction of positive samples, and
most of the samples are negative.
Thus the name, class imbalance problem.
What could be the problem with using
accuracy for a class imbalance problem?
Consider the situation where only 3%
of the cases are cancerous tumors.
If the classification model
always predicts non-cancer,
it will have an accuracy rate of 97%,
since 97% of the samples will
have non-cancerous tumors.
But note that in this case, the model
fails to detect any cancer cases at all.
So the accuracy rate is
very misleading here.
You may think that your model is
performing very well with such
a high accuracy rate.
But in fact it cannot identify any of
the cases in the class of interest.
In these cases we need evaluation
metrics that can capture how
well the model classifies positive,
versus negative classes.
A pair of evaluations metrics that
are commonly used when there is a class
imbalance are precision and recall.
Precision is defined as the number of
true positives divided by the sum of
true positives and false positives.
In other words, it is the number of true
positives divided by the total number
of samples predicted as being positive.
Recall is defined as the number of
true positives divided by the sum of
true positives and false negatives.
It is the number of true positives
divided by the total number of samples,
actually belonging to the true class.
Here's an illustration that
shows precision and recall.
The selected elements indicated by the
green half circle are the true positives.
That is samples predicted as positive and
are actually positive.
The relevant elements indicated
by the green half circle and
the green half rectangle, are the true
positives, plus the false negatives.
That is samples that are actually
positive, but some are correctly predicted
as positive, and some are incorrectly
predicted as negative.
Recall then is the number of samples
correctly predicted as positive,
divided by all samples that
are actually positive.
The entire circle indicated
by the green half circle and
the pink half circle, are the true
positives plus the false positives.
That is samples that were
predicted as positive
although some were actually positive and
some were actually negative.
Then precision is the number of samples
correctly predicted as positive,
divided by the number of all
samples predicted as positive.
Precision is considered a measure
of exactness because it calculates
the percentage of samples
predicted as positive,
which are actually in a positive class.
Recall is considered a measure of
completeness, because it calculates
the percentage of positive samples
that the model correctly identified.
There is a trade off between precision and
recall.
A perfect precision score of one for
a class C means that every sample
predicted as belonging to class C,
does indeed belong to class C.
But this says nothing about the number of
samples from class C that were predicted
incorrectly.
A perfect recall score of one for
a class C, means that every sample
from class C was correctly labeled.
But this doesn't say anything
about how many other samples were
incorrectly labeled as
belonging to class C.
So they are used together.
For example, precision values can be
compared for a fixed value of recall or
vice versa.
The goal for classification is to
maximize both precision and recall.
Precision and recall can be combined into
a single metric called the F-measure.
The equation for that is 2 times
the product of precision and
recall divided by their sum.
There are different
versions of the F-measure.
The equation on this side is for
the F1 measure which is the most
commonly used variant of the F measure.
With the F1 measure, precision and
recall are equally weighted.
The F2 measure weights recall
higher than precision.
And the F0.5 measure weights
precision higher than recall.
The value for
the F1 measure ranges from zero to one,
with higher values giving better
classification performance.
In summary, there are several metrics for
evaluating the performance
of a classification model.
They are defined in terms of
the types of errors you can get in
a classification problem.
We covered some of the most commonly
used evaluation metrics in this lecture,
namely accuracy and error rates,
precision and recall and F1 measure.